[Amit Varma]: I had a bad dream the other night. I dreamed that I was sitting on an old wooden armchair
[Amit Varma]: in an apartment that I lived in on Marine Drive. It was a massive apartment. My room
[Amit Varma]: was as big as a tennis court. And this flat seemed endless with bedrooms and dressing
[Amit Varma]: rooms and halls and hallways and bathrooms and closets and kitchens and entertainment
[Amit Varma]: rooms, sports rooms, a couple of bars, perhaps even a torture chamber. This was an apartment
[Amit Varma]: you would have to measure not in hundreds of square feet, but in thousands of square
[Amit Varma]: feet, perhaps even in acres. And as I sat on my old wooden armchair, the
[Amit Varma]: same armchair on which Jawaharlal Nehru had once panked Indira, I heard a loud noise.
[Amit Varma]: It was the kind of sound a house would make if a house could fart.
[Amit Varma]: I looked to my right and there was a huge crack on the wall. I heard the sound again
[Amit Varma]: and some cement dust fell on me. The ceiling was cracking now. I looked out through the
[Amit Varma]: window on my right and the building there collapsed. All around me, the cracks in the
[Amit Varma]: walls just grew. I looked through the inside door of the house and I found that half of
[Amit Varma]: bedroom 44 had collapsed. My old poster bed, on which Motilal Nehru's mother had given
[Amit Varma]: birth to Motilal, was half in the room and half suspended in space. Clearly the house
[Amit Varma]: was collapsing. One of the cracks in the wall nearest to me
[Amit Varma]: widened and became a hole. A sparrow thrust its head through that hole. It made chirrupy
[Amit Varma]: noises at me. And then it said in a human voice, Aren't you gonna leave the house? Aren't
[Amit Varma]: you gonna leave the house? It's falling down. And I just turned to that stupid sparrow and
[Amit Varma]: I said, How can I leave? This is a rent-controlled flat. I pay only twenty rupees a month to
[Amit Varma]: live here. I can never leave this flat. And the sparrow said, Damn this rent control!
[Unknown]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is the American economist Alex Tabarrok,
[Amit Varma]: who's here in Mumbai as a resident senior fellow at the IDFC Institute. He was a guest
[Amit Varma]: on the Scene and the Unseen a few weeks ago, where he spoke to me about FSI. Today, he
[Amit Varma]: joins me to talk about rent control. Welcome to the show, Alex.
[Amit Varma]: Great to be here. So you've by now spent like three months
[Amit Varma]: in Mumbai. This is also known as the city of rent control.
[Guest]: Yeah, that makes it fascinating for an economist to visit and see.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me the history of rent control in the USA. How did it pan out over there?
[Guest]: So rent control has been particularly big in the United States, in New York. And they
[Guest]: put into place rent control during World War II. And the thing about rent control is that
[Guest]: it's great when you first start it, because you can't run away with an apartment building.
[Guest]: So the owners of the apartment building, it's already built. The government says, Oh, you
[Guest]: can't charge, you know, a high rent. What can they do? Nothing. That's the short run,
[Guest]: or in the long run, when you have rent control, there's no incentive for developers to build
[Guest]: apartments. There's also no incentive for developers to maintain apartments. So what
[Guest]: happened in New York is that over time, huge areas of New York actually really started
[Guest]: to crumble away, almost as if they had been bombed. This was the time where you had movies
[Guest]: like Escape from New York, or Fort Apache, the Bronx, where New York literally looked
[Guest]: like a hellhole that you wanted to escape from. And really, the reason was, is that
[Guest]: rent controls created kind of a devastating situation in which entire blocks started to
[Guest]: crumble away. Now, what happened in New York is that over time, the rent controls were
[Guest]: loosened considerably, so that new buildings did not have any rent controls, so that when
[Guest]: somebody left their apartment building, you could raise the rent and things like that.
[Guest]: So although New York still has some rent controls, particularly on the old stock, what has happened
[Guest]: in the United States and in New York, in particular, is that rent controls have faded away over
[Guest]: time. And that has provided new incentives to build apartments.
[Amit Varma]: So the intentions behind rent control, obviously, they sound great, that, you know, poor people
[Amit Varma]: can't afford rising rents, and therefore you keep rents stable for them and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: What else? I mean, the unseen effects, like you mentioned, is that then the owners have
[Amit Varma]: no incentives to look after the property, to develop the property further. Isn't this
[Amit Varma]: in a sense a form of theft? You're destroying a lot of capital suddenly. It's almost like
[Amit Varma]: dead capital, not literally that, but...
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly. And the situation in Mumbai has been even worse than in New York, because
[Guest]: Mumbai put price controls, rent controls in, in something like 1949, and they have never
[Guest]: raised them. They're still the same level, despite inflation, despite changes in economic
[Guest]: circumstances, the rent controls haven't changed. So what this means is that if you're in a
[Guest]: rent controlled apartment in Mumbai, you never want to give your apartment up. I mean, even
[Guest]: if the apartment is falling apart, it doesn't matter because the rents are so ridiculously
[Guest]: low that you don't want to give your apartment up ever. And this means that it's really difficult
[Guest]: to build new apartments, to take a crumbling apartment and build something taller and bigger
[Guest]: and better, with more apartments and, you know, better infrastructure, it's really hard
[Amit Varma]: to do.
[Amit Varma]: You'll see this if you're driving down Marine Drive, for example, the Queen's Necklace,
[Amit Varma]: and you have all these old buildings lining it up, which, you know, haven't been renovated
[Amit Varma]: for decades, almost. And I know people who live in some of those old buildings in these
[Amit Varma]: sprawling flats, and they're paying like 150 rupees a month for rent, which is so absurd.
[Amit Varma]: And there are 10s and 1000s of, you know, apartments like that all across Mumbai, which
[Amit Varma]: are essentially, they're dead capital, they're just lying there, the owners can't do anything
[Amit Varma]: with it, the buildings can't be broken down and redeveloped and so on. Now, tell me this,
[Amit Varma]: I want to understand how the political economy of this works. Who are the Baptists and the
[Amit Varma]: bootleggers in this?
[Guest]: Okay. Yeah, so let me just add to that, and then we'll come to the Baptists and the bootleggers.
[Guest]: What is incredible in Mumbai is that the buildings become so dilapidated, that they literally
[Guest]: fall apart every single year, you know, as you have monsoon season come in, and then
[Guest]: these buildings are destroyed. So it literally sometimes it's killing people.
[Amit Varma]: Every few months is a scandal. And it's always sort of considered like a moral failing of
[Amit Varma]: the owner for not looking after the building. When you look at the poor guy's incentives,
[Amit Varma]: why on earth should he spend his hard earned money when he doesn't, in all practical terms,
[Guest]: own it anymore?
[Guest]: Exactly. The owners don't own the land anymore. That's exactly correct. Now, the Baptists
[Guest]: and the bootleggers, you know, it's really hard to understand. And I think this is another
[Guest]: situation where we've just gotten into a negative equilibrium, where hardly anybody is actually
[Guest]: benefiting. Yeah, you have some Baptists. So I think we're in a situation where we've
[Guest]: gone into a negative equilibrium, where hardly anybody is benefiting from the equilibrium,
[Guest]: but it's still very difficult to change. So on the Baptist sort of side, the politicians
[Guest]: make it very easy to say that, well, we're for keeping rent controls. And there are people
[Guest]: who are currently in their apartments who are benefiting from that. The problem is,
[Guest]: is that there are many, many more people who would benefit from more construction, who
[Guest]: would benefit from better infrastructure, who would benefit from taking a two-story
[Guest]: apartment building, which has a handful of apartments, pulling it down because it's about
[Guest]: to fall down anyway, and building a 10-story or a 20-story where more people could live.
[Guest]: The problem is, is that the new beneficiaries aren't voters. The new beneficiaries, they're
[Guest]: not living in Mumbai now. They'd like to live here. There's plenty of people who would like
[Guest]: to come in, but they're not current voters. And they, I think, often don't see these issues.
[Guest]: This is an unseen issue. It seems very simple to say, if we allow the greedy developers,
[Guest]: the greedy owners to raise prices, poor people are going to be kicked out of their apartment
[Guest]: buildings. And of course, there's some truth to that. The unseen part of it is that the
[Guest]: only way you're going to house millions of people in India is by building more. And the
[Guest]: only way you're going to build more is to create incentives to build more, for private
[Guest]: developers to build more. The only way of building more housing is to create incentives
[Guest]: for private developers to build more housing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, here's the interesting thing. So, I look at the voters of Mumbai. Obviously, the people
[Amit Varma]: who own rent-controlled flats, whose property have been taken away from them, are very few
[Amit Varma]: in number. A slightly larger number, a much larger number, are the people who actually
[Amit Varma]: live in those rent-controlled flats and would vote in favor of rent control. But an even
[Amit Varma]: larger number, which is everybody else, is people who don't live in rent-controlled flats
[Amit Varma]: or own them, but who would benefit enormously if rent control wasn't there. But they don't
[Amit Varma]: understand this. So, how do you get these ideas across to people so they understand
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, rent control is bad, FSI, as we discussed in a previous episode is bad.
[Amit Varma]: What's the problem with these ideas filtering through? I mean, as an economist, you often,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you teach economics, you speak to young students who are just coming fresh out
[Amit Varma]: of nowhere. Why are these ideas so hard to get across?
[Guest]: Well, you know, Adam Smith talked about the invisible hand, the logic of the market. Well,
[Guest]: the reason it's invisible, that means it's hard to see. So, that's the problem that we
[Guest]: face as economists, to try and get people to see the invisible hand. And that's just
[Guest]: very, very difficult to do. You almost need sort of constitutional rules to lock some
[Guest]: of these things in place, because it's very difficult to get people to see some of these
[Guest]: things some of the time, even when it's in their interest to see these things.
[Guest]: And I think something else which makes it difficult for people to see is that they do
[Guest]: see the corruption in the system. And it is a corrupt system the way it is now. There's
[Guest]: no question that developers will sometimes do, or owners will sometimes do disreputable
[Guest]: things to get people, you know, out of the apartments. Builders will pay bribes for various
[Guest]: things. And that turns people off. So, people see the corruption and they say, well, we
[Guest]: need something to stop this. We need some government to impose some moral rules against
[Guest]: these corrupt developers.
[Guest]: What they don't see is that the corruption is generated by the law. The law is what is
[Guest]: creating the corruption. If we could get rid of some of these laws to make it easier to
[Guest]: build, easier to own property, to rent an apartment, if we could get rid of some of
[Guest]: these laws, the corruption would go away.
[Guest]: The corruption is not a feature of capitalism. The corruption is a feature of a controlled
[Guest]: system in which all of the logic says, you know, we want to build because we've got so
[Guest]: many people who need apartments, so many people who need houses. There's a big demand for
[Guest]: houses and yet the supply is constrained. So, the logic is pushing people to build.
[Guest]: The government says no. So, of course, you're going to have bribes. And in fact, the bribes
[Guest]: are the only thing which makes the system work at all. If it weren't for the bribes,
[Guest]: there'd be even fewer houses. There'd be even less development.
[Guest]: So, the corruption in this case actually in the end serves some kind of good purpose.
[Guest]: At least it allows some building, but it looks bad. It looks immoral. It looks distasteful
[Guest]: and people don't like to see that.
[Amit Varma]: And people don't get that government is at the heart of the corruption. If not for government
[Amit Varma]: discretion and bad rules, there would be no corruption to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: You know, living in Mumbai, I often tend to be pessimistic because in all my years of
[Amit Varma]: living in India, what you tend to see is that government just grows and grows and grows.
[Amit Varma]: You can talk of reforming it, but it's just very hard to reform it in any way and to break
[Amit Varma]: down bad rules like this because you seem to be stuck in a vicious circle.
[Amit Varma]: Do you, coming from where you are, have a more positive view of things? Like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: will Mumbai forever be rent controlled the way it is now? Can these laws change? Can
[Guest]: incentives change?
[Guest]: The one thing which gives me hope is that the gains from trade here are so large that
[Guest]: they're pushing in favor of development and building and so forth. So, you know, clearly
[Guest]: India is becoming a urban society. And what that means is that hundreds of millions of
[Guest]: people are moving from the rural areas to the cities. So India must build new cities.
[Guest]: That has to happen. And it's in that building of the new cities that I think there's a chance
[Guest]: to change a lot of these rules.
[Guest]: The old cities may be stuck in this negative equilibrium, but entirely new cities are going
[Guest]: to have to be built, new cities with millions of people. So I think that there's a chance
[Guest]: here to have some demonstration projects, you know, to have in, you know, Paul Romer
[Guest]: talks about charter cities. But all we need, I think, is a few demonstration projects to
[Guest]: illustrate what could happen with better rules. And I think that would change people's point
[Guest]: of view quite a bit.
[Amit Varma]: And when I look at the political economy around rent control in particular, to bring the subject
[Amit Varma]: back there, I often see that, sure, the interest groups in favor of rent control remaining
[Amit Varma]: are the tenants who stay in the house or a vote bank and so on. But they should logically
[Amit Varma]: also be powerful interest groups who want rent control removed. For example, builders
[Amit Varma]: who are an extremely powerful lobby in Mumbai, if not the most powerful lobby, would benefit
[Amit Varma]: if rent control was removed because then they would have so much new construction to do.
[Amit Varma]: Given that, where's the resistance? Where are we stuck?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's hard to understand. I think the point you raised earlier is correct. There
[Guest]: is just a huge social ballast is that the views of the people in general are pro-rent
[Guest]: control. And that makes it very difficult, even given the incentives of the builders.
[Guest]: But because the builders look corrupt, then even, you know, even though they have all
[Guest]: the right incentives, the power of the people actually is too strong here. However, I think
[Guest]: if we had some new cities, that we would not get these rules in place. I think there's
[Guest]: enough understanding. And that's one of the amazing things about India is I think actually,
[Guest]: though maybe you'll disagree with me here, I think actually the intellectual class understands
[Guest]: these issues quite well. In speaking with people, you know, economists in India, and
[Guest]: even people in government at the top levels, I think they actually understand these issues
[Guest]: quite well. But they also feel frozen in place. They also feel that they can't do much about
[Guest]: them. However, if we had some new cities, maybe then that there would be an opportunity
[Amit Varma]: to do something new.
[Amit Varma]: Well, India's future is in the cities. And I hope we'll see you more often, both in Mumbai
[Amit Varma]: and in our new cities. Thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: To check out Alex's writings, do hop over to MarginalRevolution.com. Marginal Revolution
[Amit Varma]: is a brilliant blog that Alex co-writes with Tyler Carvin. And while I often say that the
[Amit Varma]: age of blogs is over, Marginal Revolution is an exception. Anyway, I'm outta here for
[Amit Varma]: now. But do come back next week so I can tell you about another bad dream I had.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Scene and the Unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Pawan Srinath about
[Unknown]: the ban on dubbing in the Kannada film industry. For more, go to sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Scene and the Unseen, check out another show by IVM
[Amit Varma]: Podcast, Simplified, which is hosted by my good friends Naren, Chuck and Shriketh. You